
Introduction to EUDAT for Community Data Managers and the general public.

Service: All EUDAT

DocVersion: 1.2

Authors:

Kostas Kavoussanakis, kavousan@epcc.ed.ac.uk

Cristina Manzano, c.manzano@fz-juelich.de

Emanuel Dima, emanuel.dima@uni-tuebingen.de

Rob Baxter, r.baxter@epcc.ed.ac.uk

Created: 15 May 2012

Modified: 20 Jan 2014

DocStatus: Ready to Publish
Synopsis

The EUDAT Primer is the document that explains to Community Data Managers the steps that they need to take in order  the infrastructure.

There are two modes of integration:

    to “join” EUDAT, the new infrastructure will need to adopt the EUDAT collaborative data infrastructure (CDI);
    to “use” EUDAT, it suffices to implement hooks to the webservices that make up the Common Services Layer Interface (CSLI).

In both cases the new Data Centres will benefit  of access to the EUDAT’s primary services – B2SAFE (safe replication), Persistent Identification (data registration, PID) and, in the future, B2FIND, the metadata service. Joining is a more demanding but it allows to benefit of the proper EUDAT datacentre features such as: choice of data centres to federate with for B2SHARE; use of their own PID service within the EUDAT domain; optimised data transfer within the EUDAT CDI; tighter control of data management policies (replication, authorisation) through direct management of core services at their site.

The joining process thus requires installing and configuring the EUDAT CDI, currently consisting of: the B2SAFE service; the Persistent Identifier service; and, in the future, B2FIND, the metadata harvesting and cataloguing service. In practice, three packages need to be deployed: iRODS; a Handle system (or the EPIC client); and the iRODS rules. Configuration requires connection to the EPIC system; connection to other iRODS installations in EUDAT; and (in the future) connection to the metadata catalog.

The definition of the CSLI API for Community Data Managers to use EUDAT is under development at the time of writing this document.
Introduction: How To Read This Document

This document targets the Community Data Managers who are considering integration of their data centre within EUDAT. The aim is to discuss the available options and to outline the mechanics of joining.

Chapter 2 motivates integration with EUDAT. Chapter 3 describes the EUDAT services currently available and the advantages and disadvantages of tightly integrating with EUDAT compared to loosely using its services. It also outlines the procedure in order tojoin EUDAT. Chapter 4 provides more detailed links to documentation for the specific actions to be takes so as oin EUDAT.
Why EUDAT Matters

EUDAT’s objective is to build a Collaborative Data Infrastructure (CDI) as a pan-European solution to the challenge of data proliferation in Europe’s research communities.  EUDAT will allow researchers to share their data within and between the communities. The expectation is that the services offered through the CDI will foster innovative, multidisciplinary research.  EUDAT aims at providing a data management solution that will be affordable, trustworthy, robust, persistent and easy to use.  Why does this matter?

Meeting the Grand Challenges.  Europe and its nations are faced with daunting economic, demographic, social and environmental pressures.  These Grand Challenges include an ageing population, environmental degradation, the loss of biodiversity, the growing demands for food, water and energy, and the need to respond rapidly to emerging global threats such as pandemics and bioterrorism.  The surest way to meet these challenges is to tap into the huge potential of ideas, resources and people across national borders (from Elixir impact to society).  This necessitates pan-European, interdisciplinary collaboration to help “virtualise” research – to make access to data and research ideas as transparent as possible – and long-term strategic thinking and economies geared towards innovation that will deliver new solutions and create new wealth.

The importance of data.  All efforts aimed at addressing the key societal and economic challenges in both research and industry generate increasing amounts of data.  It is estimated that the amount of data produced each year is greater than the sum of all that previously created.  The growth of data has outpaced the development of tools to deal with it.  Today, research results need to be stored for the long term in order to be processed within collaborative research projects.  There is therefore an emerging and pressing need to provide infrastructures that will meaningfully integrate new types of data to be collected in the future.

The data infrastructure landscape, in Europe and beyond, is currently fragmented and ill-equipped to deal with these challenges.  EUDAT is a direct response to this fragmentation.  EUDAT’s CDI will provide clear benefits to European researchers struggling to make best use of data. The EUDAT's CDI is  also expected to provide the data organization framework and some the "core services" in the construction of the e-infrastructures planned by many ESFRI approved infrastructures.

Improving data integration – reversing the fragmentation of research.  The European research ecosystem consists of a large number of organisations and scientific communities, each producing large volumes of diversified data.  The EUDAT CDI by adopting a data model abstraction capable to unify the organization of the different data types is expected to increase the efficiency and maintain the competitiveness of European research.

Increasing our ability to incorporate and exploit new types of data.  Addressing new problems and applying new research methodologies leads to the creation of new types of data, often by combining data from different research communities.  Storing and cataloguing data in the EUDAT CDI will enhance our abilities to use and share novel, research results.

Consolidating European resources.  The collection, curation, storage, archiving, integration and cross-community, trans-national deployment of modern research data is an immense challenge that can no longer be handled by a single organisation or by one country alone.  The EUDAT CDI will facilitate the process of extracting optimum value from current and planned investments in this area.

Improving Open Access to research data.  EU research policy requires that all public research results should be available publicly; see, for example, the ERC Scientific Council Guidelines for Open Access. The EUDAT CDI will make Open Access easier to achieve for depositors, and will thus help drive the Open Access agenda across Europe.

Linking efficiently to European compute infrastructure.  Large-scale research data often need large-scale computing power to process and analyse them.  The EUDAT CDI will make use of both technology and policy approaches to create efficient and effective links between research data and the European high-performance and high-throughput computing infrastructures provided by PRACE, EGI and others.

EUDAT matters because data matter, and data matter as our keys to unlock solutions to the Grand Challenges facing Europe in the twenty-first century.
EUDAT Services

EUDAT is developing a stack that consists of a number of core services that make up the Collaborative Data Infrastructure (CDI).  They are as follows:

    B2SAFE, a safe replication service based on iRODS;
    a Persistent Identifier service based on the global Handle System and the EPIC handle federation;
    B2SHARE, a service to allow simple storage of small datasets;
    (future) B2STAGE, a data staging service based on GridFTP;
    (future) and B2FIND, a metadata harvesting and cataloguing service.

In addition, a set of EUDAT core Operational services, essential for the management of the CDI have been defined. The relevant tool is  RCT (Resource Coordination Tool).

These components are depicted on Figure 1 and described in more detail in section Service Descriptions. We then discuss the options for your community oin EUDAT.

Figure 1: EUDAT Services
Service Descriptions 

The following tables briefly discuss the functionality offered, the technologies involved and the interfaces exposed by the EUDAT services.

 

PID – Persistent Identifier Registration

Description
	

Core PID registration service based on the global handle system and EPIC handle system federation.

Technologies
	

Handle system server (deployable locally or usable centrally); handle system server client toolkit.

Interfaces
	

EPIC/Handle system server client toolkit; http/REST.

B2SAFE – safe replication

Description
	

Core data management service allowing for the automatic, rule and policy-driven replication of data across a federation of EUDAT CDI data centres (either community or non-specific).

Technologies
	

IRODS (v3.x); EUDAT iRODS microservices.

Interfaces
	

IRODS-to-iRODS (via microservices); federation controlled by iCAT databases; iCommands interface to users (console).

B2STAGE – data staging

Description
	

High-performance data movement service which allows data to be staged into and out of the CDI to, for instance, external high-performance computing services

Technologies
	

EUDAT DSI GridFTP server.

Interfaces
	

GridFTP (external); iRODS (SR)

RCT – Resource Coordination Tool

Description
	

Web portal which provides an overview of allocated resources within the EUDAT providers. It shows as well used and committed resources, and allows community managers to make new resource requests.

Technologies
	

MySQL database plus Django web framework.

Interfaces
	

Web portal (accessible via HTTPS).

B2SHARE – simple data storing

Description
	

User-facing service which provides an easy way to upload, tag and share research data.

Technologies
	

Invenio plus EUDAT customisations.

Interfaces
	

Web portal (accessible via HTTPS).

B2FIND - metadata catalogue

Description
	
A common EUDAT metadata catalogue, storage mechanism and external user interface.
Technologies
Under development.

Interfaces
	

Under development.
“Joining” EUDAT or “using” EUDAT?

This version of the EUDAT Primer makes a clear distinction between two types of engagement with the EUDAT CDI – joining the CDI (tight integration) or using its services (loose interaction).  This is illustrated schematically in Figure 2.

In this schematic we represent a community data centre as a blue data disk accompanied by a green “community software stack” lozenge, representing tools and other software components particular to that community.  A “generic” data centre is depicted without a green software stack.  The orange lozenge represents the core software stack for an “EUDAT Node”, including all software required to deliver the core services.  The smaller orange square on the boundary of the CDI represents the Common Service Layer Interface, the interface that the CDI presents to external users.  It can be thought of as the CDI external API.

The other CDI subsystems depicted include the PID registry and the (future) metadata catalogue core metadata store and harvester service [B2FIND].

The arrows indicate the primary interactions between CDI subsystems (both control and data channels).

Figure 2: Two possible methods of interacting with the EUDAT CDI – joining it (tight integration with all core services) or using it (looser interaction through basic services).
Joining the EUDAT CDI

Joining the EUDAT CDI implies tight integration with all core services and involves two principal steps:

    installing the EUDAT Node software stack;
    configuring the EUDAT Node software stack, including making three principal federation connections with other CDI subsystems:
        federation with other data centres to enable the safe replication (B2SAFE) service (in versions 1 and 2 of the B2SAFE service this entails the federation of iRODS Zones through the standard iCAT mechanisms);
        connection to the central EUDAT PID registry (which is hierarchical, so centres that wish to deploy their own running PID registration/resolution service for performance reasons are free to do so provided these are configured correctly as part of the EUDAT registration domain);
        (optional) provide an iRODS-compliant, GridFTP server, and;
        (in future) connection to the EUDAT metadata harvest service over the OAI-PMH protocol.

When these two steps are completed, a data centre has fully joined the EUDAT CDI and can benefit from the features of tight integration such as: choice of data centres to federate with for B2SHARE; use of their own PID service within the EUDAT domain; optimised data transfer within the EUDAT CDI; tighter control of data management policies (replication, authorisation) through direct management of core services at their site.
Using the EUDAT CDI

This mode of integration will be made available later in 2013. The text that follows is provided for information.

Using the EUDAT CDI in a looser way may be important for centres that wish to make use of EUDAT’s primary services – B2SAFE (safe replication), Persistent Identification (data registration), B2FIND (metadata) – but without the tight integration required on joining.  To enable this EUDAT will develop and implement a series of simple interfaces that can be exposed as web services under the collective name Common Services Layer Interface (CSLI).

The CSLI services will be underpinned by the core services within the CDI, and so users making use of the DA service will benefit automatically from PID registration, B2SAFE etc.  However, this looser interaction model means users of the CDI will have little or no control over core features such as replication policy, fine-grained authorisation or (detailed) choices on the placement of replicated data.
How to Join EUDAT

In order for a datacentre EUDAT, they need to carry out the following actions:

    Deploy iRODS;
     Acquire a Handle prefix;
    Configure B2SAFE;
    Request disk space at EUDAT providers;
    (Optionally) Deploy and configure an iRODS-compliant GridFTP server and a GridFTP client.

Pointers about further information about these actions are available in this chapter. Please also use the online form or the EUDAT Tracker to ask for specific technical assistance.
Deploy iRODS

iRODS is a data grid software system, used in EUDAT for data management and data replication between geographically distributed centers. Its main strengths are the policy based data management facilities and the data interfacing and sharing capabilities. iRODS is open source under a BSD license, is community-driven, has a simple installation procedure and is hardware agnostic, working on all major platforms.

A large scale iRODS environment is organized into zones. Each zone is a distinct administrative domain with its own users, groups and access rights. A zone defines a unique set of hierarchical namespaces for all the objects that it contains, in the same way as a file system. Also, a zone has its own unique special database (the iCAT) where the metadata for all the zone's objects is stored.

After the initial installation and configuration of the iRODS system, existing data can be integrated either by importing it into iRODS or by mounting it as an external collection. Data exchange between zones can be accomplished via zone federation. This procedure makes a remote zone visible and accessible from the local zone, in accordance with the security settings of the remote zone.

A powerful iRODS feature is the rule system, an automation mechanism that facilitates administration and policy enforcement. Rules are described in a custom but simple language and can be set to run automatically on certain events (e.g. on ingesting a file). As an example, the rule system is currently used in EUDAT for the management of the data object PIDs when the data objects are being replicated between zones.

In depth technical documentation about deploying and configuring iRODS is available from the EUDAT user documentation.
Acquire a Handle prefix

In order to access a data object stored in EUDAT, an associated persistent identifier is needed.

EUDAT has adopted Handle-based persistent identifiers. The Handle System is a software infrastructure offering general purpose identifier resolution services. Using the open set of protocols that the Handle System provides, a distributed computer system can create and manage handles (identifiers) of digital resources. The same set of protocols allows a client to locate, query the metadata and access the data of the digital resource identified by a Handle.

An identifier in the Handle System is composed of a prefix, a slash character ('/') and a suffix. The prefix denotes a resolution subsystem (a handle server) while the identifier points to the Handle record local to that Handle Server.

EUDAT requires integration of Handle in your infrastructure. Before a community or data centre can create their own PIDs, they need to have a prefix. If you already have such a system deployed, it can interoperate with EUDAT. Otherwise, the prefix has to be purchased from Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI) at the web page: http://handle.net/service_agreement.html. At the time of writing, original registration costs $50, plus an extra 50 each year for the service fee of the prefix.

With the prefix acquired, there are two options: you can run your own Handle system; or you can pass the details of your prefix to EUDAT partner SURFsara to manage it on your behalf. SURFsara participates in the European Persistent Identifier Consortium (EPIC),  a consortium created with the goal to provide PID services for the European research community. The EPIC infrastructure is based on the Handle System and augments its capabilities focusing on the registration of primary research data. 

Further detail on acquiring a Handle prefix is available on the PID user documentation page.
Configure B2SAFE

The deployment of iRODS and the acquisition of the Handle prefix are the two prerequisites towards the main goal of joining EUDAT: safe replication. EUDAT has developed software that integrates with iRODS and links the process of replication with that of keeping in sync the digital object identifiers of the involved datacentres.

The configuration of B2SAFE is discussed on the dedicated user documentation page.
Request disk space at EUDAT providers

Having configured iRODS, PID and B2SAFE, you have in place the technology to replicate data into EUDAT providers. The RCT (Resource Coordination Tool) is an online tool which allows datacenters to request the use of resources within the EUDAT providers. It is possible to request storage resources for the B2SAFE and B2STAGE services as well as check the allocated and committed resources at every center.

In addition, the RCT provides an overview of the Service Hosting Framework available. Community data managers can apply for resources in the hosting environments which better suits their needs.

Workflows put in place within EUDAT handle every request and forwards it to the adequate center, which in turn is in charge of providing the resource and contacting the requestor when everything is in place and ready for use.

The RCT can be accessed through a web portal. A welcome page greets the visitor and instructs about the different options available. Please visit the RCT user documentation page for more details.
How to Use EUDAT

This mode of integration will be made available later in 2013
